COPYRIGHT 
This work has been transmitted to you as a subscriber or by a Sabinet subscriber. All works and portions of works published on 
Sabinet are the copyright of Sabinet. No part of any work may be reproduced or used to create works by the recipient or user, in 
any form or by any means, for any commercial or non-commercial purpose whatsoever, without Sabinet's prior written 
permission. Any unauthorised reproduction of a work subject to copyright will constitute a copyright infringement and render the 
doer liable under both civil and criminal law  
MEDICINES AND RELATED SUBSTANCES ACT 101 OF 1965 
 
(Afrikaans text signed by the State President) 
 
[Assented To: 19 June 1965] 
[Commencement Date: 1 April 1966] 
 
as amended by: 
 
Drugs Control Amendment Act 29 of 1968 
Drugs Control Amendment Act 88 of 1970 
Drugs Laws Amendment Act 95 of 1971 
Drugs Control Amendment Act 65 of 1974 
Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act 19 of 1976 
Health Laws Amendment Act 36 of 1977 
Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act 17 of 1979 
Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act 20 of 1981 
Transfer of Powers and Duties of the State President Act 97 of 1986 
Businesses Act 71 of 1991 
Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act 94 of 1991 
General Law Amendment Act 49 of 1996 
Abolition of Restrictions on the Jurisdiction of Courts Act 88 of 1996 
Medicines and Related Substances Control Amendment Act 90 of 1997 
Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Act 59 of 2002 
 
ACT 
 
To provide for the registration of medicines and related substances intended for human 
and for animal use; to provide for the establishment of a Medicines Control Council; to 
provide that such council shall be a juristic person; to make other provision for the 
constitution of the council; to provide that a member of the council or committee shall 
declare his or her commercial interest related to the pharmaceutical or health care 
industry; to provide that the appointment of members of the executive committee is subject 
to the approval of the Minister; to provide for the control of medicines and scheduled 
substances and medical devices; to make further provision for the prohibition on the sale of 
medicines which are subject to registration and are not registered; to provide for 
procedures that will expedite the registration of essential medicines, and for the re-
evaluation of all medicines after five years; to provide, for measures for the supply of more 
affordable medicines in certain circumstances; to provide that labels be approved by the 
council; to prohibit sampling and bonusing of medicines; to provide for the licensing of 
certain persons to  compound, dispense or manufacture medicines and medical devices and 
also to act as wholesalers or distributors; to provide for the generic substitution of 

PAGE 1

medicines; to provide for the establishment of a pricing committee; to regulate the 
purchase and sale of medicines by manufacturers,  
distributors, wholesalers, pharmacists and persons licensed to dispense medicines; to make 
new provisions for appeals against decisions of the Director-General or the council; to 
provide that the council may acquire and appropriate funds; to regulate the Minister's 
power to make regulations; to provide for the rationalization of certain laws relating to 
medicines and related substances that have remained in force in various territories on the 
national territory of the Republic by virtue of item 2 of Schedule 6 to the Constitution of 
the Republic of South Africa, 1996; and to provide for matters connected therewith. 
[Long title substituted by s. 37 of Act 65/74, s. 15 of Act 17/79, s. 22 of Act 94/91, s. 29 of Act 90/97 and s. 13 of 
Act 59/2002] 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
1.    Definitions   
2.    Establishment, powers and functions of Medicines Control Council  
3.    Constitution of council   
4.    Period of office and remuneration of members of the council   
5.    Chairman and vice-chairman  
6.    Disqualifications, vacation of office, filling of vacancies and declaration of 
interest  
7.    Meetings of the council   
8.    Quorum, majority decision and chairman‟s casting vote   
9.    Appointment of executive committee and other committees  
10.  ……….   
11.  ……….   
12.  Appointment of Registrar and Deputy Registrar of Medicines   
13.  Medicines register   
14.  Prohibition on the sale of medicines which are subject to registration and are not 
registered   
15.  Registration of medicines   
15A.  Amendment of entries in register   
15B.  Transfer of certificates of registration  
15C.  Measures to ensure supply of more affordable medicines 
16.  Cancellation of registration   
17.  Notification of registration or cancellation of registration in Gazette   
18.  Labels and advertisements   
18A. Bonusing 
18B.  Sampling of medicines 
18C.  Marketing of medicines 
19.  Prohibition on sale of medicines which do not comply with prescribed requirements and 
furnishing of information regarding medicines to the council  
20.  Publication or distribution of false advertisements concerning medicines   
21.  Council may authorize sale of unregistered medicine for certain purposes   
22.  Director-General to cause certain information to be furnished   
22A.  Control of medicines and Scheduled substances   
22B.  Publication of information relating to medicine, Scheduled substance or medical device   

PAGE 2

22C.  Licensing 
22D.  Period of validity and renewal of licence 
22E.  Suspension and cancellation of licence 
22F.  Generic substitution 
22G.  Pricing committee 
22H.  Purchase and sale of medicines by wholesalers 
23.  Disposal of undesirable medicines   
24.  Appeal against decision of council or Director-General   
25.  Privileges of council and committees  
26.  Inspectors   
27.  Analysts, pharmacologists and pathologists   
28.  Powers of inspectors   
29.  Offences   
30.  Penalties   
31.  Procedure and evidence   
32.  ..........  
33.  Act or omission by manager, agent or employee   
33A.  Funds of council 
34.  Preservation of secrecy   
34A.  Delegation of powers  
35.  Regulations   
36.  Exclusion of any drug from operation of Act  
36A.  Minister may prohibit the manufacture, sale or use of certain veterinary medicines  
37.  ..........  
37A.  Amendment of Schedules   
38.  Operation of Act in relation to other laws   
39.  State bound   
40.  Short title   
Schedule 1     
Schedule 2     
Schedule 3     
Schedule 4     
Schedule 5     
Schedule 6     
Schedule 7     
Schedule 8     
Schedule 9     
 
1.     Definitions 
 
(1)    In this Act, unless the context otherwise indicates - 
 
“advertisement”, in relation to any medicine or Scheduled substance, means any 
written, pictorial, visual or other descriptive matter or verbal statement or reference - 
   
(a)  appearing in any newspaper, magazine, pamphlet or other publication; or 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 1 of Act 20/81] 

PAGE 3

   
(b)  distributed to members of the public; or 
   
(c)  brought to the notice of members of the public in any manner whatsoever, 
 
which is intended to promote the sale of that medicine or Scheduled substance; and 
“advertise” has a corresponding meaning; 
 
“analyst” means an analyst to whom authority has been granted under section 27; 
 
“appeal board” ………. 
[Definition of “appeal board” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“approved name”, in relation to a medicine, means the international nonproprietary 
name (INN) of such medicine or, where no such name exists, such other name as the 
council may determine, not being a brand name or trade name registered in terms of 
the Trade Marks Act, 1993 (Act No 194 of 1993); 
[Definition of “approved name” substituted by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“certificate of registration” means a certificate of registration issued under section 
15 (4), 15A (4) or 15B (4); 
[Definition of “certificate of registration” inserted by s. 1 of Act 20/81] 
 
“council” means the Medicines Control Council established by section 2; 
 
“dentist” means a person registered as such under the Health Professions Act, 1974; 
[Definition of “dentist” substituted by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“Director-General” means the Director-General: Health; 
[Definition of “Director-General” inserted by s. 1 of Act 20/81 and substituted by s. 1 of Act 94/91 and s. 1 of Act 
90/97] 
 
“export” includes deliver or supply within the Republic for dispatch to any 
destination outside the Republic; 
[Definition of “export” inserted by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 
“hospital” means any institution established as a hospital or a nursing home or 
registered as such in terms of any law; 
 
“immediate container”, in relation to a medicine or Scheduled substance, means a 
container which is in direct contact with the medicine or substance; 
[Definition of “immediate container” inserted by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 
“inspector” means a person authorized as such under section 26; 
 
“interchangeable multi-source medicine” means medicines that contain the same 
active substances which are identical in strength or concentration, dosage form and 

PAGE 4

route of administration and meet the same or comparable standards, which comply 
with the requirements for therapeutic equivalence as prescribed; 
[Definition of “interchangeable multi-source medicine” inserted by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“label”, when used as a verb, means brand, mark or otherwise designate or describe, 
and when used as a noun, means any brand or mark or any written, pictorial or other 
descriptive matter appearing on or attached to or packed with and referring to any 
article or the package containing any article; 
 
“magistrate” means a magistrate as defined in section 1 of the Magistrates Act, 
1993 (Act No. 90 of 1993), and includes an additional magistrate and an assistant 
magistrate; 
[Definition of “magistrate” inserted by s. 1 of Act 59/2002] 
 
“Medical Act” .......... 
[Definition of “Medical Act” deleted by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“medical device” means any instrument, appliance, material, machine, apparatus, 
implant or diagnostic reagent - 
   
(a)   used or purporting to be suitable for use or manufactured or sold for use in 
- 
   
(i)  the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, modification, monitoring or 
prevention of disease, abnormal physical or mental states or the 
symptoms thereof; or 
   
(ii)  restoring, correcting or modifying any somatic or psychic or organic 
function; or 
   
(iii) the diagnosis or prevention of pregnancy, 
   
  and which does not achieve its purpose through chemical, pharmacological, 
immunological or metabolic means in or on the human body but which may be 
assisted in its function by such means; or 
   
(b) declared by the Minister by notice in the Gazette to be a medical device, 
 
and includes any part or an accessory of a medical device; 
[Definition of “medical device” inserted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“medical practitioner” means a person registered as such under the Health 
Professions Act, 1974, and includes an intern registered under that Act; 
[Definition of “medical practitioner” substituted by s. 1 of Act 17/79, s. 1 of Act 94/91 and s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“medicinal purpose” ………. 
[Definition of “medicinal purpose” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 

PAGE 5

“medicine” means any substance or mixture of substances used or purporting to be 
suitable for use or manufactured or sold for use in - 
   
(a)  the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, modification or prevention of disease, 
abnormal physical or mental state or the symptoms thereof in man; or 
   
(b)  restoring, correcting or modifying any somatic or psychic or organic function 
in man, 
 
and includes any veterinary medicine; 
[Definition of “medicine” substituted by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 
“Minister” means the Minister of Health; 
[Definition of “Minister” substituted by s. 1 of Act 20/81, s. 1 of Act 94/91 and s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“nurse” means a person registered as such under the Nursing Act, 1978 (Act No. 50 
of 1978); 
[Definition of “nurse” inserted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“package” means anything in or by which any medicine or Scheduled substance is 
enclosed, covered, contained or packed; 
 
“pathologist” means a pathologist to whom authority has been granted under 
section 27; 
 
“pharmacist” means a person registered as such under the Pharmacy Act, 1974; 
[Definition of “pharmacist” substituted by s. 1 of Act 17/79 and s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“pharmacist intern” means a person registered as such under the Pharmacy Act, 
1974; 
[Definition of “pharmacist intern” inserted by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
“pharmacist’s assistant” means a person registered as such under the Pharmacy 
Act, 1974; 
[Definition of “pharmacist‟s assistant” inserted by s. 1 of Act 17/79, deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91 and inserted by s. 1 
of Act 90/97] 
 
“pharmacologist”, except for the purposes of section 24 (1) (c), means a 
pharmacologist to whom authority has been granted under section 27; 
[Definition of “pharmacologist” substituted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“pharmacy Board” ………. 
[Definition of “pharmacy Board” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“practitioner” means a person registered as such under the Allied Health 
Professions Act, 1982 (Act No. 63 of 1982); 
[Definition of “practitioner” inserted by s. 1 of Act 94/91and substituted by s. 1 of Act 90/97 and s. 1 of Act 
59/2002] 

PAGE 6

 
“prescribed” means prescribed by or under this Act; 
 
“public” includes a section of the public concerned with manufacturing, dispensing, 
selling or administering, or the issue of prescriptions for, medicines or a Scheduled 
substance; 
[Definition of “public” inserted by s. 1 of Act 20/81] 
 
“register”, when used as a noun, means the register referred to in section 13, and 
when used as a verb, means to enter in such register; 
 
“registered” means entered in the register; 
 
“registrar” means the Registrar of Medicines appointed under section 12; 
 
“regulation” means a regulation made and in force under this Act; 
 
“Scheduled substance” means any medicine or other substance prescribed by the 
Minister under section 22A; 
[Definition of “Scheduled substance” substituted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 1 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 1 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 2 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 2 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91]  
 
“Schedule 3 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 3 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 4 substance” . . . . . . 
[Definition of “Schedule 4 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 5 substance” . . . . . . 
[Definition of “Schedule 5 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 6 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 6 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 7 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 7 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 8 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 8 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“Schedule 9 substance” ………. 
[Definition of “Schedule 9 substance” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 

PAGE 7

“Secretary” ………. 
[Definition of “Secretary” deleted by s. 1 of Act 20/81] 
 
“sell” means sell by wholesale or retail and includes import, offer, advertise, keep, 
expose, transmit, consign, convey or deliver for sale or authorize, direct or allow a 
sale or prepare or possess for purposes of sale, and barter or exchange or supply or 
dispose of to any person whether for a consideration or otherwise; and “sale” and 
“sold” have corresponding meanings; 
 
“this Act” includes any regulation; 
 
“the territory” ………. 
[Definition of “the territory” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91 and s. 1 of Act 49/96] 
 
“trainee pharmacist” ………. 
[Definition of “trainee pharmacist” deleted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“unqualified assistant” ………. 
[Definition of “unqualified assistant” deleted by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 
“veterinarian” means a person registered as such under the Veterinary and Para-
Veterinary Professions Act, 1982 (Act No. 19 of 1982); 
[Definition of “veterinarian” substituted by s. 1 of Act 94/91] 
 
“veterinary medicine” means any substance or mixture of substances, other than a 
stock remedy or farm feed to be registered in terms of the Fertilizers, Farm Feeds, 
Agricultural Remedies and Stock Remedies Act, 1947 (Act No. 36 of 1947), used or 
purporting to be suitable for use or manufactured or sold for use in connection with 
vertebrates, for the treatment, diagnosis, prevention or cure of any disease, infection 
or other unhealthy condition, or for the maintenance or improvement of health, 
growth, production or working capacity, or for curing, correcting or modifying any 
somatic or organic function, or for correcting or modifying behaviour.  
[Definition of “veterinary medicine” added by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 
(2)    Subject to section 15C, a medicine shall, notwithstanding the fact that its components 
are identical to those of any other medicine as to physical characteristics, quantity 
and quality, for the purpose of this Act not be regarded as being the same medicine 
as that other medicine if registration thereof is not applied for by the holder of the 
certificate of registration issued in respect of that other medicine. 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 1 of Act 17/79, s. 1 of Act 20/81 and s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 
(3)    In determining whether or not the registration or availability of a medicine is in the 
public interest, regard shall be had only to the safety, quality and therapeutic efficacy 
thereof in relation to its effect on the health of man or any animal, as the case may 
be.  
[Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 1 of Act 17/79] 
 

PAGE 8

(4)   International tendering for medicines shall be allowed in the prescribed manner and 
on the prescribed conditions. 
[Sub-s. (4) added by s. 1 of Act 90/97] 
 [S. 1 substituted by s. 1 of Act 65/74]  
 
2.     Establishment, powers and functions of Medicines Control Council 
 
(1)    There is hereby established a council to be known as the Medicines Control Council, 
which may exercise the powers and shall perform the functions conferred upon or 
assigned to the council by this Act. 
 
(2)    The Council may advise the Minister or furnish a report to the Minister on any matter 
referred to the council by the Minister for consideration and arising from the 
application of this Act. 
[Sub-s. (2) added by s. 2 of Act 94/91] 
 
(3)   The council shall be a juristic person. 
[Sub-s. (3) added by s. 2 of Act 90/97] 
 [S. 2 substituted by s. 2 of Act 65/74]  
 
3.     Constitution of council 
 
The council shall consist of so many members, but not more than 24, as the Minister may 
from time to time determine and appoint. 
 [S. 3 amended by s. 3 of Act 65/74, s. 1 of Act 36/77, s. 2 of Act 17/79, s. 46 of Act 97/86 and s. 3 of Act 94/91 and 
substituted by s. 3 of Act 90/97] 
 
4.     Period of office and remuneration of members of the council 
 
(1)   A member of the council shall, subject to the provisions of section 6(3), be appointed 
for a period of five years but a new council shall be appointed within six months after 
the date of commencement of the Medicines and Related Substances Control 
Amendment Act, 1997. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 4 of Act 90/97] 
 
(2)   Any person whose period of office as a member of the council has expired, shall be 
eligible for reappointment: Provided that no person who has served two periods of 
five years as a member shall be so eligible. 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 4 of Act 90/97] 
 
(3)    The Minister shall give notice in the Gazette of the appointment of any member of 
the council and the date from which his membership commences and, in the case of a 
member appointed to fill a casual vacancy on the council, the period for which he is 
appointed. 
 
(4)    A member of the council (other than a person who is in the full-time employment of 
the State) shall receive such remuneration and such allowances in respect of his 

PAGE 9

services as a member of the council or of any committee thereof, as the Minister in 
consultation with the Minister of Finance may determine. 
[Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 4 of Act 65/74] 
 
5.     Chairman and vice-chairman 
 
(1)    One of the members of the council shall be designated by the Minister as chairman of 
the council and another member shall be designated by the Minister as vice-chairman 
to act as chairman during the absence of the chairman. 
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 46 of Act 97/86] 
 
(2)    The vice-chairman, when acting as chairman as provided in subsection (1), shall have 
all the powers and discharge all the duties of the chairman. 
 
6.     Disqualifications, vacation of office, filling of vacancies and declaration of interest 
 
(1)   No person shall be appointed as a member of the council- 
 
(a)   who is an unrehabilitated insolvent; 
 
(b)   who is disqualified under the Veterinary and Para-Veterinary Professions Act, 
1982, the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions 
Act, 1982, the Health Professions Act, 1974, or the Pharmacy Act, 1974, from 
carrying on his or her profession, while so disqualified; 
 
(c)   who is not a South African citizen permanently resident in the Republic; or 
 
(d)   who is employed in the pharmaceutical industry. 
 
(2)   A member of the council shall vacate his or her office- 
 
(a)   if he or she is or becomes subject to any disqualification referred to in 
subsection (1); 
 
(b)   .......... 
[Para. (b) deleted by s. 2 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(c)   if he or she becomes mentally ill, as defined in the Mental Health Act 1973 
(Act No. 18 of 1973); 
 
(d)   if he or she is convicted of an offence and is sentenced to imprisonment 
without the option of a fine; 
 
(e)   if he or she has been absent from more than two consecutive meetings of the 
council without the council's leave; or 
 

PAGE 10

(f)   if the Minister is satisfied that the member has violated the internal rules of 
conduct as determined by the council and published by notice in the Gazette. 
 
(3)   If the office of any member becomes vacant before the expiration of the period for 
which he or she was appointed, the Minister may appoint another person to hold 
office for the unexpired portion of the period for which his or her predecessor was 
appointed. 
[Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 2 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(4)   A member of the council or of a committee appointed in terms of section 9 shall 
declare his or her commercial interests related to the pharmaceutical or health care 
industry, which interests shall include, but shall not be limited to, any consultancy, 
paid or unpaid, any research grant from which the member directly or indirectly 
benefits, or any equity holding or any executive or non-executive directorship or any 
other payment or benefit in kind, and shall recuse himself or herself from any 
discussion or decision-making to which the said interests relate or may relate. 
 [S. 6 amended by s. 5 of Act 65/74, s. 3 of Act 17/79, s. 46 of Act 97/86, s. 4 of Act 94/91 and s. 1 of Act 49/96 and 
substituted by s. 5 of Act 90/97] 
 
7.     Meetings of the council 
 
(1)    The first meeting of the council shall be held at a time and place to be fixed by the 
Minister, and all subsequent meetings shall, subject to the provisions of subsection 
(2), be held at such times and places as may be fixed by the council: Provided that 
the council shall hold at least one meeting in any period of three months and, if at the 
close of any meeting the council has not fixed the time and place for its next meeting, 
such time and place shall be fixed by the chairman. 
 
(2)    The chairman of the council may at any time call a special meeting of the council to 
be held at such time and place as he may determine, and shall, upon a written request 
by the Minister or a written request signed by not less than three members of the 
council, call a special meeting thereof to be held within thirty days after the date of 
receipt of such request, at such time and place as he may determine.  
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 6 of Act 65/74] 
 
8.     Quorum, majority decision and chairman’s casting vote 
 
(1)    A majority of all the members of the council shall form a quorum for any meeting of 
the council. 
 
(2)    At all meetings of the council the chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, or 
in the absence of both the chairman and the vice-chairman, some other member of 
the council chosen by the members present, shall preside. 
 
(3)    Save as provided in section thirty-six, the decision of a majority of the members of 
the council present at any meeting thereof shall constitute a decision of the council, 
and in the event of an equality of votes in regard to any matter, the person presiding 

PAGE 11

at the meeting in question shall have a casting vote in addition to his deliberative 
vote. 
 
(4)    No decision or act done under the authority of the council shall be invalid by reason 
only of an interim vacancy on the council or of the fact that a person who is 
disqualified from being a member of the council, or with respect to whose 
appointment the provisions of this Act have not been observed, sat or acted as a 
member at the time when the decision was taken or the act was performed or 
authorized, if the decision was taken or the act was performed or authorized by the 
requisite majority of the members of the council present at the time who were 
entitled to sit and act as members. 
 
9.     Appointment of executive committee and other committees 
 
(1)    The council may appoint - 
 
(a)   subject to the approval of the Minister, from among its members an executive 
committee; and 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 6 of Act 90/97] 
 
(b)  subject to the approval of the Minister, such other committees as it may deem 
necessary, to investigate and report to it on any matter within the purview of 
the council in terms of this Act. 
 
(2)    The executive committee may, subject to the directions of the council, exercise all 
the powers and perform all the functions of the council during periods between 
meetings of the council, but shall not have the power, save in so far as the council 
otherwise directs, to set aside or vary any decision of the council, and any action 
taken or decision made by the executive committee shall be subject to review at the 
first ensuing meeting of the council. 
 
(3)    The council may appoint such persons, including persons other than members of the 
council, as it may deem fit, to be members of any committee appointed in terms of 
paragraph (b) of subsection (1). 
 
(4)    There shall be payable to a member of a committee of the council (other than a 
member of the council or a person who is in the full-time employment of the State) 
such remuneration and such allowances, while he is engaged in the carrying out of 
his duties as a member of such committee, as the Minister may, in consultation with 
the Minister of Finance, determine. 
[Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 7 of Act 65/74] 
 
10.   ………. 
[S. 10 substituted by s. 8 of Act 65/74, amended by s. 4 of Act 17/79 and s. 46 of Act 97/86 and repealed by s. 5 of 
Act 94/91] 
 
11.   ………. 

PAGE 12

[S. 11 amended by s. 9 of Act 65/74, s. 5 of Act 17/79 and s. 46 of Act 97/86 and repealed by s. 6 of Act 94/91] 
 
12.     Appointment of Registrar and Deputy Registrar of Medicines 
 
(1)   The Minister may, after consultation with the council, appoint a Registrar and one or 
more Deputy Registrars or revoke such an appointment. 
 
(2)   The Registrar shall exercise the powers and perform the duties assigned to, or 
imposed upon hire or her in terms of this (Act and such other powers and duties as 
may from time to time be assigned to or imposed upon him or her by the council, 
Minister or Director-General. 
 
(3)   A Deputy Registrar shall assist the Registrar in the exercise of his or her powers and 
the performance of his or her duties and may, subject to the approval of the Registrar, 
exercise any power conferred upon the Registrar. 
[S. 12 substituted by s. 10 of Act 65/74, amended by s. 7 of Act 90/97 and substituted by s. 3 of Act 59/2002] 
 
13.     Medicines register 
 
The registrar shall keep in the prescribed form a register, to be known as the medicines 
register, in which he shall register all medicines the registration of which has been 
approved by the council, and in which he shall enter all such particulars in regard to such 
medicines and the holder of the certificate of registration in respect of such medicines as 
are required by this Act to be entered therein. 
[S. 13 amended by s. 11 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 2 of Act 20/81] 
 
14.    Prohibition on the sale of medicines which are subject to registration and are not 
registered 
 
(1)    Save as provided in this section or sections 21 and 22A, no person shall sell any 
medicine which is subject to registration by virtue of a resolution published in terms 
of subsection (2) unless it is registered.  
 
(2)    (a)    The council may from time to time by resolution approved by the 
Minister, 
determine that a medicine or class or category of medicines or part of any class 
or category of medicines mentioned in the resolution shall be subject to 
registration in terms of this Act. 
 
(b)    Any such resolution may also relate only to medicines which were available for 
sale in the Republic immediately prior to the date on which it comes into 
operation in terms of paragraph (c) or only to medicines which were not then 
so available. 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 7 of Act 94/91] 
 
(c)    Any such resolution shall be published in the Gazette by the registrar and shall 
come into operation on the date on which it is so published.  

PAGE 13

 
(3)    In the case of a medicine which was available for sale in the Republic immediately 
prior to the date of publication in the Gazette of the resolution by virtue of which it is 
subject to registration in terms of this Act, the provisions of subsection (1) shall 
come into operation - 
 
(a)  if no application for the registration of such medicine is made within the period 
of six months immediately succeeding that date, on the expiration of that 
period; or 
 
(b)  if application for the registration of such medicine is made within the said 
period, on the date one month after the date on which a notice in respect of 
such medicine is published in the Gazette in terms of section 15 (10) or section 
17 (a). 
[Sub-s. (3) amended by s. 7 of Act 94/91] 
 
(4)   The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply in respect of the sale of any 
medicine- 
 
(a)   compounded in the course of carrying on his or her professional activities by a 
pharmacist, veterinarian or person who is the holder of a licence contemplated 
in section 22C(1)(a), for a particular patient in a quantity not greater than the 
quantity required for treatment as determined by the medical practitioner, 
pharmacist, practitioner or veterinarian; or 
 
(b)   compounded by a pharmacist in a quantity not greater than that prescribed by 
regulation for sale in the retail trade, subject to the conditions likewise 
prescribed or in a quantity for a particular person or animal as prescribed by a 
medical practitioner or a dentist or a veterinarian or a practitioner or a nurse or 
other person registered under the Health Professions Act, 1974, and referred to 
in section 22A, as the case may be, 
 
if such medicine does not contain any component the sale of which is prohibited by 
this Act or any component in respect of which an application for registration has 
been rejected, and is not or has not been advertised: Provided that the active 
components of such medicine appear in another medicine which has been registered 
under this Act. 
[Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 6 of Act 17/79, s. 7 of Act 94/91 and s. 8 of Act 90/97] 
 
(5)    .......... 
[Sub-s. (5) deleted by s. 8 of Act 90/97] 
[S. 14 substituted by s. 1 of Act 29/68 and s. 12 of Act 65/74] 
 
15.     Registration of medicines 
 

PAGE 14

(1)    Every application for the registration of a medicine shall be submitted to the registrar 
in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by the prescribed particulars and 
samples of the relevant medicine and by the prescribed registration fee. 
 
(2)   The registrar shall- 
 
(a)   as soon as possible after receipt by him or her of any such application submit 
the application together with any particulars and samples which accompanied 
the application to the council for consideration and shall simultaneously inform 
the applicant in writing that the application has been so submitted; 
 
(b)   ensure that such an application in respect of medicine which appears on the 
latest Essential Drug List or medicine which does not appear thereon but 
which, in the opinion of the Minister, is essential for national health is subject 
to such procedures as may be prescribed in order to expedite the registration. 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
 
(3)    (a)    If after consideration of any such application and after any investigation or 
enquiry which it may consider necessary the council is satisfied that the 
medicine in question is suitable for the purpose for which it is intended and 
complies with the prescribed requirements and that registration of that 
medicine is in the public interest, it shall approve of the registration thereof. 
 
(b)   If the council is not so satisfied it shall cause the applicant to be notified in 
writing of the reasons why it is not so satisfied and cause the applicant to be 
informed that he or she may within a period of one month after the date of the 
notification furnish the registrar with his or her comments on the council‟s 
reasons for not being so satisfied. 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
 
(c)    If no such comments are submitted by the applicant within the said period, or if 
after consideration of any comments so submitted the council is still not 
satisfied as aforesaid, it shall reject the application. 
 
(4)    When the council has approved of the registration of any medicine the registrar shall 
register that medicine and shall enter in the register such particulars in regard to the 
medicine as are required by this Act to be so entered and shall issue to the applicant a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed form in respect of that medicine. 
 
(5)    Every medicine shall be registered under such name as the council may approve. 
 
(6)    The registrar shall allocate to every medicine registered under this Act a registration 
number which shall be recorded in the register opposite the name of such medicine 
and which shall be stated in the certificate of registration issued in respect of such 
medicine. 
 

PAGE 15

(7)   Any registration under this section, including the registration of medicines already 
registered, shall be valid for a period of five years and may be made subject to such 
conditions as may with regard to the succeeding provisions of this section be 
determined by the council. 
[Sub-s. (7) substituted by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
 
(8)    No condition shall be imposed under subsection (7) whereby the sale of the medicine 
in question by any person other than a pharmacist is prohibited or until after the 
applicant has in writing been notified by the registrar that the imposition of such 
condition is contemplated and invited to submit written representations to the council 
in regard to the matter. 
 
(9)   If no such representations are lodged with the registrar by the applicant concerned 
within a period of one month after the receipt by him or her of any notification 
referred to in subsection (8), or if after consideration of any such representations the 
council is still of the opinion that the condition in question should be imposed, the 
council shall direct the registrar to register the medicine concerned subject to the said 
condition. 
[Sub-s. (9) substituted by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
 
(10)   Notice of the rejection of an application under this section in respect of a medicine 
referred to in subsection (3) of section 14 shall be given in the Gazette by the 
registrar - 
 
(a)  if no appeal is lodged against the rejection within the period referred to in 
section 24, as soon as possible after the expiration of that period; or 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 8 of Act 94/91] 
 
(b)  if any appeal so lodged is dismissed, as soon as possible after the decision 
dismissing the appeal has been given. 
 
(11)  The registrar shall as soon as possible after the date of expiry of the appropriate 
period referred to in section 14(3) publish in the Gazette the prescribed particulars in 
respect of all applications for registration received by him or her prior to such date. 
[Sub-s. (11) substituted by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
 
(12)  For the purposes of this section, „Essential Drug List‟ means the list of essential 
drugs included in the latest edition of the official publication relating to guidelines 
for standard treatment which is compiled by the Department of Health. 
[Sub-s. (12) added by s. 9 of Act 90/97] 
[S. 15 amended by s. 2 of Act 29/68 and substituted by s. 13 of Act 65/74] 
 
15A.  Amendment of entries in register 
 
(1)    The entry made in the register with respect to any medicine may on application by 
the holder of the certificate of registration issued in respect of such medicine be 
amended by the registrar with the approval of the council. 

PAGE 16

 
(2)    Application for the amendment of an entry in the register shall be made to the 
registrar on the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by the prescribed 
application fees. 
 
(3)    The registrar shall as soon as possible after the receipt of any such application submit 
the application to the council for consideration. 
 
(4)    If the council grants its approval in respect of any application submitted to it in terms 
of subsection (3) the registrar shall make the required amendments in the register 
and, if necessary, cancel the existing certificate of registration in respect of such 
medicine and issue a new certificate of registration on the prescribed form to the 
applicant in respect of such medicine. 
[S. 15A inserted by s. 3 of Act 20/81] 
 
15B.  Transfer of certificates of registration 
 
(1)    A certificate of registration may with the approval of the council be transferred by 
the holder thereof to any other person. 
 
(2)    Application for approval of the transfer of a certificate of registration shall be made 
to the registrar on the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by the certificate of 
registration in question and the prescribed application fees. 
 
(3)    The registrar shall as soon as practicable after the receipt of any such application 
submit the application to the council for consideration. 
 
(4)    If the council grants any application submitted to it in terms of subsection (3) the 
registrar shall make the necessary entries in the register relating to the person to 
whom the certificate of registration is transferred, cancel the existing certificate of 
registration and issue a new certificate of registration on the prescribed form to such 
person in respect of the relevant medicine. 
[S. 15B inserted by s. 3 of Act 20/81] 
 
15C.  Measures to ensure supply of more affordable medicines 
 
The Minister may prescribe conditions for the supply of more affordable medicines in 
certain circumstances so as to protect the health of the public, and in particular may- 
 
(a)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Patents Act 1978 (Act No. 
57 of 1978), determine that the rights with regard to any medicine under a patent 
granted in the Republic shall not extend to acts in respect of such medicine which has 
been put onto the market by the owner of the medicine, or with his or her consent; 
 
(b)   prescribe the conditions on which any medicine which is identical in composition, 
meets the same quality standard and is intended to have the same proprietary name as 
that of another medicine already registered in the Republic, but which is imported by 

PAGE 17

a person other than the person who is the holder of the registration certificate of the 
medicine already registered and which originates from any site of manufacture of the 
original manufacturer as approved by the council in the prescribed manner, may be 
imported; 
 
(c)   prescribe the registration procedure for, as well as the use of, the medicine referred to 
in paragraph (b). 
[S. 15C inserted by s. 10 of Act 90/97] 
 
16.    Cancellation of registration 
 
(1)    If the council - 
 
(a)  is of the opinion that any person has failed to comply with any condition 
subject to which any medicine has been registered; or 
 
(b)  is of the opinion that any medicine does not comply with any prescribed 
requirement; or 
 
(c)  is of the opinion that it is not in the public interest that any medicine shall be 
available to the public, 
 
the council shall cause notice in writing to be given accordingly by the registrar to 
the holder of the certificate of registration issued in respect of that medicine. 
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 14 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 4 of Act 20/81] 
 
(2)    Any such notice shall specify the grounds on which the council‟s opinion is based, 
and shall indicate that the person to whom it is directed may within one month after 
receipt thereof submit to the registrar any comments he may wish to put forward in 
connection with the matter. 
 
(3)    If no such comments are so submitted, or if after consideration of any comments so 
submitted the council is of the opinion that the registration of the medicine in 
question should be cancelled, the council may direct the registrar to cancel the 
registration thereof. 
[Sub-s. (3) amended by s. 14 of Act 65/74] 
 
(4)    If the person who is the holder of the certificate of registration issued in respect of 
any medicine fails to pay the prescribed annual fee in respect of the retention of the 
registration of that medicine before or on the prescribed date or such later date as the 
registrar may with the approval of the council determine on application by that 
person, the registrar shall cancel the registration of that medicine. 
[Sub-s. (4) added by s. 3 of Act 29/68, amended by s. 14 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 4 of Act 20/81] 
 
17.     Notification of registration or cancellation of registration in Gazette 
 

PAGE 18

The registrar shall give notice in the Gazette of the registration or cancellation of the 
registration of any medicine in terms of this Act, and shall in such notice specify - 
 
(a)  in the case of a registration of any medicine, the name under which such medicine is 
registered, the active components of such medicine, the name of the person who 
applied for the registration of such medicine, the number allocated to it in terms of 
section 15 and the conditions (if any) subject to which it is registered; 
 
(b)  in the case of a cancellation of the registration of any medicine, the name under 
which such medicine was registered, the name of the holder of the certificate of 
registration issued in respect of such medicine and the number which was allocated 
to it in terms of section 15. 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 5 of Act 20/81] 
 [S. 17 amended by s. 4 of Act 29/68 and substituted by s. 15 of Act 65/74]  
 
18.     Labels and advertisements 
 
(1)    No person shall sell any medicine or Scheduled substance unless the immediate 
container or the package in which that medicine or Scheduled substance is sold bears 
a label stating the prescribed particulars. 
 
(2)    No person shall advertise any medicine or Scheduled substance for sale unless such 
advertisement complies with the prescribed requirements. 
 
(3)   The label referred to in subsection (1) shall be approved by the council. 
[Sub-s. (3) added by s. 11 of Act 90/97] 
 
(4)   The council may authorise a deviation from the prescribed format and contents of 
any label. 
[Sub-s. (4) added by s. 11 of Act 90/97] 
 
(5)   The Minister may prescribe additional requirements for the labelling of medicines. 
[Sub-s. (5) added by s. 11 of Act 90/97] 
[S. 18 substituted by s. 16 of Act 65/74 and s. 7 of Act 17/79] 
 
18A.  Bonusing 
 
No person shall supply any medicine according to a bonus system, rebate system or any 
other incentive scheme. 
[S. 18A inserted by s. 12 of Act 90/97 with effect from 2 May 2004] 
 
18B.  Sampling of medicines 
 
(1)   No person shall sample any medicine. 
 
(2)   For the purposes of this section „sample‟ means the free supply of medicines by a 
manufacturer or wholesaler or its agent to a pharmacist, medical practitioner, dentist, 
veterinarian, practitioner, nurse or other person registered under the Health 

PAGE 19

Professions Act, 1974, but does not include the free supply of medicines for the 
purposes of clinical trials, donations of medicines to the State, tendering to the State 
and quality control by inspectors. 
 
(3)   The use of medicines or Scheduled substances for exhibition purposes shall be as 
prescribed. 
[S. 18B inserted by s. 12 of Act 90/97] 
 
18C.  Marketing of medicines 
 
The Minister shall after consultation with the pharmaceutical industry and other 
stakeholders, make regulations relating to the marketing of medicines, and such regulations 
shall also provide for an enforceable Code of Practice. 
[S. 18C inserted by s. 12 of Act 90/97 and substituted by s. 4 of Act 59/2002] 
 
19.    Prohibition on sale of medicines which do not comply with prescribed requirements 
and furnishing of information regarding medicines to the council 
 
(1)    No person shall sell any medicine unless it complies with the prescribed 
requirements.  
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 17 of Act 65/74] 
 
(2)    The council may by notice in writing require any person who manufactures or sells 
or administers or prescribes any medicine or on whose direction any medicine is 
administered to furnish it, within a period stipulated in such notice, with any 
information which such person has in his possession or which such person is in a 
position to obtain regarding such medicine. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 17 of Act 65/74] 
 
(3)    The council may, if so requested by any person to whom a notice under subsection 
(2) is addressed, extend the period stipulated in such notice. 
 
20.     Publication or distribution of false advertisements concerning medicines 
 
(1)    No person shall - 
 
(a)  publish or distribute or in any other manner whatsoever bring to the notice of 
the public or cause or permit to be published or distributed or to be so brought 
to the notice of the public any false or misleading advertisement concerning 
any medicine; or 
[Para. (a) amended by s. 18 of Act 65/74] 
 
(b)  in any advertisement make any claim to the effect that the therapeutic efficacy 
and effect of any medicine is other than that stated by the council in terms of 
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of section twenty-two or state or suggest that 
any medicine should be used for a purpose or under circumstances or in a 

PAGE 20

manner other than that stated by the council in terms of subparagraph (iii) or 
paragraph (a) of that section. 
[Para. (b) amended by s. 18 of Act 65/74] 
 
(2)    It shall be a sufficient defence in any prosecution for an offence under paragraph (a) 
of subsection (1) if it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that the accused, not 
being a person selling the medicine to which the false or misleading advertisement 
which is the subject of the prosecution relates, did not know, and could not 
reasonably be expected to have known, that the advertisement was in any respect 
false or misleading, unless it is proved that the accused failed on demand by the 
registrar or an inspector or a member of the South African Police to furnish the name 
and address of the person at whose instance the advertisement was published, 
distributed or so brought to the notice of the public. 
[Sub-s. 2 amended by s. 18 of Act 65/74] 
 
21.     Council may authorize sale of unregistered medicine for certain purposes 
 
(1)    The council may in writing authorize any person to sell during a specified period to 
any specified person or institution a specified quantity of any particular medicine 
which is not registered. 
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 19 of Act 65/74] 
 
(2)    Any medicine sold in pursuance of any authority under subsection (1) may be used 
for such purposes and in such manner and during such period as the council may in 
writing determine. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 19 of Act 65/74] 
 
(3)    The council may at any time by notice in writing withdraw any authority granted in 
terms of subsection (1) if effect is not given to any determination made in terms of 
subsection (2). 
 
22.     Director-General to cause certain information to be furnished 
 
(1)    The Director-General shall after consultation with the council, cause, in such manner 
as the Director-General considers most suitable - 
 
(a)  as soon as practicable after any medicine, other than a veterinary medicine, has 
been registered, medical practitioners, dentists, pharmacists and the person who 
applied for the registration of such medicine to be informed - 
 
(i)  of the name and number under which such medicine is registered and the 
conditions, if any, subject to which such medicine is registered; 
 
(ii)  of the therapeutic efficacy and effect of such medicine; 
 
(iii)  of the purpose for which, the circumstances under which and the manner 
in which such medicine should be used; and 

PAGE 21

 
(iv)  regarding any other matter concerning such medicine which, in the 
opinion of the council, may be of value to them; 
 
(b)  as soon as practicable after the registration of any medicine, other than a 
veterinary medicine, has been cancelled in terms of section 16, medical 
practitioners, dentists, pharmacists and the holder of the certificate of 
registration issued in respect of such medicine to be informed of the 
cancellation of such registration. 
[Para (b) substituted by s. 6 of Act 20/81] 
 
(2)    The provisions of subsection (1) shall apply mutatis mutandis in respect of any 
veterinary medicine, and for the purposes of such application the reference in that 
subsection to medical practitioners and dentists shall be deemed to be a reference to 
veterinarians. 
[S. 22 substituted by s. 20 of Act 65/74 and s. 8 of Act 17/79] 
 
22A.  Control of medicines and Scheduled substances 
 
(1)   Subject to this section, no person shall sell, have in his or her possession or 
manufacture any medicine or Scheduled substance, except in accordance with the 
prescribed conditions. 
 
(2)   The Minister may, on the recommendation of the council, prescribe the Scheduled 
substances referred to in this section. 
 
(3)   Any Schedule 0 substance may be sold in an open shop. 
 
(4)   Any Schedule 1 substance shall not be sold-    
 
(a)   by any person other than- 
 
(i)      a pharmacist, or a pharmacist intern or pharmacist‟s assistant acting 
under the personal supervision of a pharmacist; 
 
(ii)     a manufacturer of or wholesale dealer in pharmaceutical products for sale 
to any person who may lawfully possess such substance; 
 
(iii)    a medical practitioner or dentist, who may- 
 
(aa)   prescribe such substance; 
 
(bb)  compound and dispense such substance only if he or she is the 
holder of a licence as contemplated in section 22C(1)(a); 
 
(iv)    a veterinarian who may prescribe, compound or dispense such substance; 
 

PAGE 22

(v)     a practitioner, nurse or a person registered under the Health Professions 
Act, 1974, other than a medical practitioner or dentist, who may- 
 
(aa)   prescribe only the Scheduled substances identified in the Schedule 
for that purpose; 
 
(bb)  compound and dispense the Scheduled substances referred to in 
item (aa) only if he or she is the holder of a licence contemplated in 
section 22C(1)(a); 
 
(b)   to any person apparently under the age of 14 years except upon a prescription 
issued by an authorised prescriber and dispensed by a pharmacist, pharmacist 
intern or pharmacist‟s assistant or by a veterinarian or a person who is the 
holder of a licence as contemplated in section 22C(1)(a), or on a written order 
disclosing the purpose for which such substance is to be used and bears a 
signature known to the seller as the signature of a person known to such seller 
and who is apparently over the age of 14 years; 
 
(c)   unless the seller, other than a manufacturer or wholesale dealer in 
pharmaceutical products, enters in a prescription book required to be kept in 
the prescribed manner, the prescribed particulars of such sale. 
 
(5)   Any Schedule 2, Schedule 3, Schedule 4, Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 substance shall 
not be sold by any person other than- 
 
(a)   a pharmacist, pharmacist intern or a pharmacist‟s assistant acting under the 
personal supervision of a pharmacist, who may sell only Schedule 2 substances 
without a prescription; 
 
(b)   a pharmacist or a pharmacist intern or pharmacist‟s assistant acting under the 
personal supervision of a pharmacist, upon a written prescription issued by an 
authorised prescriber or on the verbal instructions of an authorised prescriber 
who is known to such pharmacist; 
 
(c)   a manufacturer of or wholesale dealer in pharmaceutical products for sale to 
any person who may lawfully possess such substance; 
 
(d)   a medical practitioner or dentist, who may- 
 
(i)      prescribe such substance; 
 
(ii)     compound or dispense such substance only if he or she is the holder of a 
licence as contemplated in section 22C(l)(a); 
 
(e)   a veterinarian who may prescribe, compound or dispense such substance; 
 

PAGE 23

(f)   a practitioner, a nurse or a person registered under the Health Professions Act, 
1974, other than a medical practitioner or dentist, who may- 
 
(i)      prescribe only the Scheduled substances identified in the Schedule for 
that purpose; 
 
(ii)     compound and dispense the Scheduled substances referred to in 
subparagraph (i) only if he or she is the holder of a licence contemplated 
in section 22C(l)(a): 
 
(6)   Any sale under subsection (5) shall only take place on condition that- 
 
(a)   all the prescribed particulars of every sale shall be recorded in the prescribed 
manner in a prescription book or other permanent record required to be kept in 
the prescribed manner; 
 
(b)   the authorised prescriber who has given verbal instructions to a pharmacist to 
dispense a prescription shall within seven days after giving such instructions 
furnish such pharmacist with a prescription confirming such instructions; 
 
(c)   in the case of verbal instructions the treatment period shall not exceed seven 
days; 
 
(d)   if a prescription is not presented for dispensing within 30 days of issue it shall 
not be dispensed; 
 
(e)   in the case of a Schedule 2 substance, such substance may not be supplied to 
any person apparently under the age of 14 years except upon a prescription 
issued by an authorised prescriber and dispensed by a pharmacist, pharmacist 
intern or pharmacist‟s assistant or by a veterinarian or a person who is the 
holder of a licence as contemplated in section 22C(1)(a), or on a written order 
disclosing the purpose for which such substance is to be used and bears a 
signature known to the seller as the signature of a person known to such seller 
and who is apparently over the age of 14 years; 
 
(f)   in the case of a Schedule 2, Schedule 3 or Schedule 4 substance, such sale may 
be repeated if the person who issued the prescription has indicated thereon the 
number of times it may be dispensed, but not for longer than six months; 
 
(g)   in the case of a Schedule 5 substance, such sale shall not be repeated for longer 
than six months, and then only if the authorised prescriber has indicated on the 
prescription the number of times and the intervals at which it may be 
dispensed; 
 
(h)   where a Schedule 5 substance is used for- 
 

PAGE 24

(i)      its anxiolytic, antidepressant or tranquillising properties it shall not be 
prescribed for longer than six months unless the authorised prescriber has 
consulted a registered psychiatrist, or, in the case of a psychiatrist, 
another psychiatrist before issuing a new prescription; 
 
(ii)     its analgesic properties it shall not be prescribed for longer than six 
months unless the authorised prescriber has consulted another medical 
practitioner, before issuing a new prescription; 
 
(i)   in the case of a Schedule 6 substance, it shall not be repeated without a new 
prescription being issued; 
 
(j)   in an emergency in which the health or life of a patient is at stake, a pharmacist 
engaged in wholesale practice may, on receipt of a telephonic or telefaxed or 
other electronic request, supply a Schedule 6 substance to a pharmacist, 
medical practitioner, dentist, veterinarian, practitioner, nurse or other person 
registered under the Health Professions Act, 1974, without a written order: 
Provided that- 
 
(i)      it shall be the responsibility of such pharmacist, medical practitioner, 
dentist, veterinarian, practitioner, nurse or other person to ensure that 
such pharmacist receives a written order within seven days. 
 
(ii)     the Schedule 6 substance shall be supplied in the smallest unit sales pack 
available; 
 
(iii)    a permanent record is made and kept of such supply. 
 
(k)   in an emergency a pharmacist may sell any Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 substance 
in a quantity not greater than that required for continuous use for a period of 48 
hours, on the verbal instructions of a medical practitioner, dentist, veterinarian, 
practitioner, nurse or other person registered under the Health Professions Act, 
1974, who is known to such pharmacist, but the prescriber who has given such 
verbal instructions shall within 72 hours after giving such instructions furnish 
to such pharmacist a written prescription confirming the instructions; 
 
(l)   in an emergency a pharmacist may sell a Schedule 2, Schedule 3 or Schedule 4 
substance on a non-recurring basis for a period not exceeding 30 days in 
accordance with the original prescription in order to ensure that therapy is not 
disrupted if he or she is satisfied that an authorised prescriber initiated the 
therapy, with the intention that the therapy be continued, and that the 
particulars of such sale are recorded in a prescription book or other prescribed 
permanent record; 
 
(m)   a pharmacist may sell a greater or a lesser quantity of a Schedule 1, Schedule 2, 
Schedule 3 or Schedule 4 substance than the quantity prescribed or ordered, 

PAGE 25

according to the therapeutic pack in the original container of such substance as 
supplied to him or her, but the quantity so sold shall not exceed or be less than, 
25 per cent of the quantity specified in the prescription or order in question; 
 
(n)   any seller referred to in this subsection shall retain the prescription or order 
concerned for a period of not less than five years as from the date of such sale; 
 
(o)   a Schedule 6 substance may only be sold if the course of treatment does not 
exceed 30 consecutive days; 
 
(p)   the sale of as specified Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 substance by a manufacturer 
of or wholesale dealer in pharmaceutical products shall be recorded in a 
register which shall be kept in the prescribed manner, and shall be balanced so 
as to show clearly the quantity of every specified Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 
substance remaining in stock as on the last day of March, June, September and 
December of each year, and such balancing shall be completed within the 14 
days following each of the said dates; 
[Para. (p) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(q)   a pharmacist shall endorse on the prescription the date of sale and the quantity 
of the substance sold, and when it is repeated, the date of sale and the quantity 
of the said substance sold, and the last seller shall retain the prescription for a 
period of not less than five years as from the date of the last sale; 
 
(r)   any Schedule 1, Schedule 2, Schedule 3 or Schedule 4 substance for the 
treatment of any animal may be supplied by any person practicing a pare-
veterinary profession within the meaning of the Veterinary and Para-Veterinary 
Professions Act, 1982 (Act No. 19 of 1982), upon a written prescription issued 
by a veterinarian or on the verbal instructions of a veterinarian. 
 
(7)   (a)   No person, other than a pharmacist, pharmacist intern or pharmacist‟s 
assistant 
acting under the personal supervision of a pharmacist, shall sell or export a 
Schedule 1, Schedule 2, Schedule 3, Schedule 4, Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 
substance for analytical purposes, manufacture of foods, cosmetics, educational 
or scientific purposes, unless a permit, issued in accordance with the prescribed 
conditions has, subject to paragraph (b), been obtained from the Director-
General for such purpose. 
 
(b)   The Director-General may revoke any permit referred to in paragraph (a) if the 
conditions on which such permit was issued, are not complied with or if it is 
not in the public interest that the particular action be continued. 
 
(8)   Subject to subsection (9), a Schedule 8 substance shall not be acquired by any person 
other than the Director-General for the purpose of providing a medical practitioner 
therewith, on the prescribed conditions, for the treatment of a particular patient of 

PAGE 26

that medical practitioner upon such conditions as the Director-General, on the 
recommendation of the council, may determine. 
[Sub-s. (8) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(9)   (a)   No person shall- 
 
(i)      acquire, use, possess, manufacture, or supply any Schedule 7 or Schedule 
8 substance, or manufacture any specified Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 
substance unless he or she has been issued with a permit by the Director-
General for such acquisition, use, possession, manufacture, or supply: 
Provided that the Director-General may, subject to such conditions as he 
or she may determine, acquire or authorise the use of any Schedule 7 or 
Schedule 8 substance in order to provide a medical practitioner, analyst, 
researcher or veterinarian therewith on the prescribed conditions for the 
treatment or prevention of a medical condition in a particular patient, or 
for the purposes of education, analysis or research; 
[Subpara. (i) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(ii)     manufacture, use or supply any Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 substance for 
other than medicinal purposes, unless he or she has been issued by the 
Director-General with a permit for such manufacture, use or supply upon 
the prescribed conditions. 
 
(b)   Notwithstanding paragraph (a), the Director-General may at any time revoke 
any permit issued in terms of that paragraph if any condition on which the 
permit was issued is not being complied with. 
 
(c)   A permit issued in terms of this subsection shall be valid for a period of 12 
calendar months after the date of issue thereof. 
 
(10)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, no person shall 
sell or administer any Scheduled substance or medicine for other than medicinal 
purposes: Provided that the Minister may, subject to the conditions or requirements 
stated in such authority, authorise the administration outside any hospital of any 
Scheduled substance or medicine for the satisfaction or relief of a habit or craving to 
the person referred to in such authority. 
 
(11)  (a)   No person shall import or export any specified Schedule 5, Schedule 6, 
Schedule 
7 or Schedule 8 substance or other substance or medicine prescribed for that 
purpose unless a permit has been issued to him or her by the Director-General 
in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions as may be determined 
by the Director-General. 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 

PAGE 27

(b)   A permit referred to in paragraph (a) may be issued for any purpose other than 
the satisfaction or relief of a habit or craving in respect of such substance or 
medicine. 
 
(c)   The issue of a permit referred to in paragraph (a) may be refused if- 
 
(i)      the Director-General is not convinced that the applicant is capable of 
keeping or storing the substance or medicine in a satisfactory manner in 
order to prevent the loss thereof; 
 
(ii)     the use of such substance or medicine has not been authorised in terms of 
this Act; 
 
(iii)    the Director-General is of the opinion that the annual importation quota 
for such substance has been exceeded or will be exceeded; 
 
(iv)    the Director-General is of the opinion that such substance or medicine, of 
an acceptable quality, is already available in the Republic; or 
 
(v)     the applicant did not comply with the conditions under which a previous 
permit was issued to him or her. 
 
(d)   If an application is refused, the applicant shall be furnished with the reasons for 
such refusal. 
 
(e)   A permit issued in terms of this subsection shall be valid for a period of six 
months from the date of issue thereof. 
 
(12)  (a)   The control on the importation of Scheduled substances shall relate to- 
 
(i)   any specified Schedule 5, Schedule 6, Schedule 7 or Schedule 8 
substance; 
[Subpara. (i) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(ii)     such substances irrespective of the scheduling status allocated thereto, as 
the Minister may prescribe; 
 
(iii)    any other substance which becomes subject to international control in 
terms of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs or the 1971 
Convention on Psychotropic Substances entered into by the Republic. 
 
(b)   The obtaining of import or export permits as required ill terms of subsection 
(11) shall not apply to any preparation which contains a substance as 
prescribed which is specifically exempted from all control measures for the 
obtaining of such import or export permits by the 1961 Single Convention on 
Narcotic Drugs referred to in paragraph (a). 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 

PAGE 28

 
(c)   Notwithstanding paragraph (b), no such importation or exportation shall take 
place unless authorised by the Director-General. 
[Para. (c) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(13)  Any permit issued under subsection (11) shall be subject- 
 
(a)   to the applicant‟s furnishing the registrar annually with the prescribed 
information; 
 
(b)   to the requirement that there shall be no deviation from the particulars reflected 
on the permit: Provided that if the quantity of such substance or medicine to be 
imported is less than that provided for in the permit, the Director-General shall 
be informed in writing thereof within 10 days after the importation of such 
substance or medicine; and 
 
(c)   to the conditions, as detailed on the permit, having been complied with, the 
triplicate copy of the permit having been certified by a customs officer or an 
employee of the S.A. Post Office Limited. 
 
(14)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section- 
 
(a)   a pharmacist‟s assistant shall not handle any specified Schedule 5 or Schedule 
6 substance except as contemplated in subsection (5)(a) and (b); and  
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(b)   no nurse or a person registered under the Health Professions Act, 1974, other 
than a medical practitioner or dentist, may prescribe a medicine or Scheduled 
substance unless he or she has been authorised to do so by his or her 
professional council concerned. 
 
(15)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the Director-
General may, after consultation with the Interim Pharmacy Council of South Africa 
as referred to in section 2 of the Pharmacy Act, 1974 (Act No. 53 of 1974), issue a 
permit to any person or organisation performing a health service, authorising such 
person or organisation to acquire, possess, use or supply any specified Schedule 1, 
Schedule 2, Schedule 3, Schedule 4 or Schedule 5 substance, and such permit shall 
be subject to such conditions as the Director-General may determine. 
 
(16)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section- 
 
(a)   any person may possess a Schedule 0, Schedule 1 or Schedule 2 substance for 
medicinal purposes; 
 
(b)   any person may possess a Schedule 3, Schedule 4, Schedule 5 or Schedule 6 
substance if he or she is in possession of a prescription issued by an authorised 
prescriber; 

PAGE 29

[Para. (b) substituted by s. 5 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(c)   any medicine or scheduled substance may be possessed by a medical 
practitioner, dentist, veterinarian, practitioner, nurse or other person registered 
under the Health Professions Act, 1974, or under the Veterinary and Para-
Veterinary Professions Act, 1982, for the purposes of administering it in 
accordance with his or her scope of practice; 
 
(d)   any medicine or scheduled substance may be possessed for sale by a 
pharmacist, a person licenced to own a pharmacy in terms of the Pharmacy 
Act, 1974, or a person who is the holder of a licence as contemplated in section 
22C. 
 
(17)  For the purposes of this section- 
 
(a)   „authorised prescriber‟ means a medical practitioner, dentist, veterinarian, 
practitioner, nurse or other person registered under the Health Professions Act, 
1974; and 
 
(b)   „medicinal purpose‟ means for the purposes of the treatment or prevention of a 
disease or some other definite curative or therapeutic purpose, but does not 
include the satisfaction or relief of a habit or craving for the substance used or 
for any other such substance, except where the substance is administered or 
used in a hospital or similar institution maintained wholly or partly by the 
Government or a provincial government or approved for such purpose by the 
Minister. 
[S. 22A inserted by s. 21 of Act 65/74, amended by s. 9 of Act 17/79 and s. 7 of Act 71/91, and substituted by s. 9 of 
Act 94/91 and s. 13 of Act 90/97]  
 
22B.  Publication of information relating to medicine, Scheduled substance or medical 
device 
 
(1)    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 34 the council may, if it deems it expedient 
and in the public interest, disclose information in respect of the prescribing, 
dispensing, administration and use of a medicine, Scheduled substance or medical 
device. 
 
(2)    The Director-General may publish the information referred to in subsection (1) or 
release it to the public in a manner which he thinks fit. 
[S. 22B inserted by s. 10 of Act 94/91] 
 
22C.  Licensing 
 
(1)   Subject to the provisions of this section- 
 
(a)   the Director-General may on application in the prescribed manner and on 
payment of the prescribed fee issue to a medical practitioner dentist, 

PAGE 30

practitioner, nurse or other person registered under the Health Professions Act, 
1974, a licence to compound and dispense medicines, on the prescribed 
conditions; 
 
(b)   the council may, on application in the prescribed manner and on payment of 
the prescribed fee, issue to a manufacturer, wholesaler or distributor of a 
medicine or medical device a licence to manufacture, import or export, act as a 
wholesaler of or distribute, as the case may be, such medicine or medical 
device, upon such conditions as to the application of such acceptable quality 
assurance principles and good manufacturing and distribution practices as the 
council may determine. 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 6 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(2)   A licence referred to in subsection shall (1)(a) shall not be issued unless the applicant 
has successfully completed a supplementary course determined by the South African 
Pharmacy Council after consultation with the Health Professions Council of South 
Africa the Allied Health Professions Council of South Africa and the South African 
Nursing Council. 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 6 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(3)   The Director-General or the council, as the case may be, may require an applicant 
contemplated in subsection (1) to furnish such information, in addition to any 
information furnished by the applicant in terms of the said subsection, as the 
Director-General or the council may deem necessary. 
 
(4)   When the Director-General or the council, as the case may be, grants or refuses an 
application for a licence- 
 
(a)   written notice shall be given of that fact to the applicant; and 
 
(b)   in the event of the refusal of an application, the applicant shall be furnished 
with the reasons for such refusal. 
 
(5)   No person shall compound or dispense a medicine unless he or she is authorised 
thereto in terms of the Pharmacy Act, 1974, is a veterinarian or is the holder of a 
licence as contemplated in subsection (1)(a). 
[Sub-s. (5) substituted by s. 6 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(6)   No manufacturer, wholesaler or distributer referred to in subsection (1)(b) shall 
manufacture, import or export, act as a wholesaler of or distribute, as the case may 
be, any medicine unless he or she is the holder of a licence contemplated in the said 
subsection. 
[Sub-s. (6) substituted by s. 6 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(7)   Subsections (5) and (6) shall come into operation twelve months from the date of  
commencement of this section. 
[Sub-s. (7) substituted by s. 6 of Act 59/2002] 

PAGE 31

[S. 22C inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
22D.  Period of validity and renewal of licence 
 
A licence issued under section 22C shall be valid for the prescribed period but may be 
renewed on application in the prescribed manner and before the prescribed time or such 
later time as the Director-General or the council, as the case may be, may allow and on 
payment of the prescribed fee. 
[S. 22D inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
22E.  Suspension and cancellation of licence 
 
(1)   If the holder of a licence under section 22C- 
 
(a)   has in or in connection with an application for a licence or renewal of a licence 
furnished the Director-General or the council, as the case may be, with any 
information which to the knowledge of such holder is untrue or misleading in 
any material respect; 
 
(b)   has contravened or failed to comply with a condition upon which the licence 
was issued; 
 
(c)   has contravened or failed to comply with a provision of this Act; 
 
(d)   has, in the case of a licence issued in terms of section 22C(1)(a), at any time 
been convicted of an offence which is of such a nature that, in the opinion of 
the Director-General, it renders him or her unsuitable to compound or dispense 
medicines, the Director-General or the council, as the case may be, may by 
way of a notice in writing call upon him or her to show cause within the period 
specified in the notice, which period shall not be less than 20 days as from the 
date of the notice, why the licence in question should not be suspended or 
revoked. 
 
(2)   The Director-General or the council, as the case may be, may after considering the 
reasons furnished to him or her in terms of subsection (1)- 
 
(a)   suspend the licence in question for such period as he or she or the council may 
determine; or 
 
(b)   revoke the licence in question. 
 
(3)   No person shall be entitled to the repayment of any prescribed fee in respect of any 
application for the granting or renewal of a licence if such application has been 
refused or if the licence has been suspended or revoked. 
[S. 22E inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
22F.  Generic substitution 

PAGE 32

 
(1)   Subject to subsections (2), (3) and (4), a pharmacist or a person licensed in terms of 
section 22C(1)(a) shall- 
 
(a)   inform all members of the public who visit the pharmacy or any other lace 
where dispensing takes place, as the case may be with a prescription for 
dispensing, of the benefits of the substitution for a branded medicine by an 
interchangeable multi-source medicine, and shall, in the case of a substitution, 
take reasonable steps to inform the person who prescribed the medicine of such 
substitution; and 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 7 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(b)   dispense an interchangeable multi-source medicine instead of the medicine 
prescribed by a medical practitioner, dentist, practitioner, nurse or other person 
registered under the Health Professions Act, 1974, unless expressly forbidden 
by the patient to do so. 
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 7 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(2)   If a pharmacist is forbidden as contemplated in subsection (1)(b), that fact shall be 
noted by the pharmacist on the prescription. 
 
(3)   When an interchangeable multi-source medicine is dispensed by a pharmacist he or 
she shall note the brand name or where no such brand name exists, the name of the 
manufacturer of that interchangeable multi-source medicine in the prescription book. 
 
(4)   A pharmacist shall not sell an interchangeable multi-source medicine- 
 
(a)   if the person prescribing the medicine has written in his or her own hand on the 
prescription the words „no substitution‟ next to the item prescribed; 
 
(b)   if the retail price of the interchangeable multi-source medicine is higher than 
that of the prescribed medicine; or 
 
(c)   where the product has been declared not substitutable by the council. 
[S. 22F inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
22G.  Pricing committee 
 
(1)   The Minister shall appoint, for a period not exceeding five years, such persons as he 
or she may deem fit to be members of a committee to be known as the pricing 
committee. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 8 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(2)   The Minister may, on the recommendation of the pricing committee, make 
regulations- 
 
(a)   on the introduction of a transparent pricing system for all medicines and 
Scheduled substances sold in the Republic; 

PAGE 33

 
(b)   on an appropriate dispensing fee to be charged by a pharmacist or by a person 
licensed in terms of section 22C(l)(a). 
 
(c)   on an appropriate fee to be charged by wholesalers or distributors or any other 
person selling Schedule 0 medicines. 
[Para. (c) added by s. 8 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(3)   (a)   The transparent pricing system contemplated in subsection (2)(a) shall 
include a 
single exit price which shall be published as prescribed, and such price shall be 
the only price at which manufacturers shall sell medicines and Scheduled 
substances to any person other than the State. 
 
(b)   No pharmacist or person licensed in terms of section 22C(1)(a) or wholesaler 
or distributor shall sell a medicine at a price higher than the price contemplated 
in paragraph (a). 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 8 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(c)   Paragraph (b) shall not be construed as preventing a pharmacist or person 
licensed in terms of this Act to charge a dispensing fee as contemplated in 
subsection (2)(b). 
 
(4)   To the members of the pricing committee who are not in the full-time employment of 
the State may be paid such remuneration and allowances as the Minister, with the 
concurrence of the Minister of Finance, may determine. 
[S. 22G inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
22H.  Purchase and sale of medicines by wholesalers 
 
(1)   (a)   No wholesaler shall purchase medicines from any source other than from 
the 
original manufacturer or from the primary importer of the finished product. 
 
(b)   A wholesaler shall sell medicines only into the retail sector. 
 
(2)   Subsection (1) shall not be construed as preventing the return of medicines for credit 
purposes only, to the manufacturer or wholesaler from which that medicine was 
initially obtained. 
 
(3)   Any wholesaler may in the prescribed manner and on the prescribed conditions be 
exempted by the Director-General from the provisions of subsection (1). 
[S. 22H inserted by s. 14 of Act 90/97] 
 
23.     Disposal of undesirable medicines 
 

PAGE 34

(1)    If the council is of the opinion that it is not in the public interest that any medicine 
shall be made available to the public, it may - 
 
(a)  by notice in writing transmitted by registered post to any person direct that 
person; or 
 
(b)  by notice in the Gazette direct any person, 
 
to return any quantity of such medicine which he has in his possession to the 
manufacturer thereof or (in the case of any imported medicine) to the importer 
concerned or to deliver or send it to any other person designated by the council. 
[Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 22 of Act 65/74] 
 
(2)    The council may by notice in writing direct any manufacturer or importer of any such 
medicine who has in his possession any quantity thereof (including any quantity 
returned, delivered or sent to him in pursuance of a direction under subsection (1)), 
or any other person to whom any quantity of such medicine has been so returned, 
delivered or sent, to deal with or dispose of that quantity in such manner as the 
council may determine. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 22 of Act 65/74] 
 
(3)    No person shall sell any medicine which is the subject of a notice under subsection 
(1) which has not been set aside on appeal. 
[Sub-s. (3) amended by s. 22 of Act 65/74] 
 
24.  Appeal against decision of council or Director-General 
[Heading substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the council may, within the prescribed period, 
in the prescribed manner and upon payment of the prescribed fee appeal against such 
decision to an appeal committee appointed by the Minister for the purposes of the 
appeal concerned. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(2)   An appeal committee contemplated in subsection (1) shall consist of no fewer than 
three persons: Provided that- 
 
(a)   the chairperson shall be appointed on account of his or her knowledge of the 
law;  
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(b)   the skills of the other two members shall be relevant to the case concerned; 
 
(c)   no member shall have a direct or indirect interest in the affairs of the appellant 
or respondent. 
 
(3)   The appeal committee may after hearing the appeal- 
 

PAGE 35

(a)   confirm, set aside or vary the relevant decision of the council; and 
 
(b)   direct the council to execute the decision of the appeal committee. 
[Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(4)   The decision of the appeal committee shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be 
furnished to the appellant as well as to the council. 
[Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(5)   To the members of the appeal committee who are not in the full-time employment of 
the State shall be paid such remuneration and allowances as the Minister, with the 
concurrence of the Minister of Finance, may determine. 
 
(6)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director-General may within the 
prescribed period and in the prescribed manner make written representations with 
regard to such decision to the Minister. 
[Sub-s. (6) substituted by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(7)   The Minister shall, after considering representations made in terms of subsection (6), 
confirm, set aside or vary the decision of the Director-General. 
[Sub-s. (7) added by s. 9 of Act 59/2002] 
[S. 24 amended by s. 23 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 11 of Act 94/91 and s. 15 of Act 90/97] 
 
25.     Privileges of council and committees 
 
The council or a committee appointed under section 9(1), 22G(1) or 24(1) or any member 
of the council or of any such committee shall not be liable in respect of anything done in 
good faith under this Act. 
[S. 25 substituted by s. 32 of Act 88/96 and s. 10 of Act 59/2002] 
 
26.     Inspectors 
 
(1)    The Director-General may authorize such persons as inspectors, as he may consider 
necessary for the proper enforcement of this Act. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 10 of Act 17/79] 
 
(2)    Every inspector shall be furnished with a certificate signed by the Director-General 
and stating that he has been authorized as an inspector under this Act. 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 1 of Act 19/76] 
 
(3)    An inspector shall, before he exercises or performs any power or function under this 
Act, produce and exhibit to any person affected hereby, the certificate referred to in 
subsection (2). 
[S. 26 substituted by s. 24 of Act 65/74] 
 
27.     Analysts, pharmacologists and pathologists 
 

PAGE 36

The Director-General may grant such authority to such analysts, pharmacologists and 
pathologists as he may consider necessary for the proper enforcement of this Act. 
[S. 27 substituted by s. 25 of Act 65/74 and s. 11 of Act 17/79] 
 
28.     Powers of inspectors 
 
(1)   An inspector may, at all reasonable times- 
 
(a)   enter upon- 
 
(i)   any place or premises from which- 
 
(aa)   a person authorized under this (Act to compound or dispense 
medicines or scheduled substances; 
 
(bb)  the holder of a licence as contemplated in section 22C(1)(b): 
 
(cc)   the holder of a certificate of registration of a medicine, conducts 
business. 
 
(ii)   any place, premises, vessel or aircraft if he or she suspects on reasonable 
grounds that an offence in terms of this Act has been or is being 
committed thereon or therein or that an attempt has been made or is being 
made to commit such an offence thereon or therein; or 
 
(iii)   any private dwelling, with the consent of the occupier or under the 
authority of a warrant issued in terms of subsection (5) or without a 
warrant in terms of subsection (6); 
 
(b)   inspect any medicine or scheduled substance, any book, record or documents 
that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds contains any information 
relevant to the administration or enforcement of this Act; 
 
(c)   seize any book record, documents or medicine or scheduled substance or take 
so many samples of any such medicine or scheduled substance as he or she 
may consider necessary for the purpose of testing, examination or analysis in 
terms of this Act. 
 [Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 26 of Act 65/74 and s. 16 of Act 90/97 and substituted by s. 11 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(2)    Any sample taken in terms of paragraph (d) of subsection (1) shall be taken in 
accordance with the prescribed methods and in the presence of the person who is in 
charge of such medicine or Scheduled substance, or if there is no such person or if he 
is absent for any reason, in the presence of any other witness, shall forthwith be 
packed and sealed and suitably labelled or marked in such manner as its nature may 
permit and shall then be transmitted to an analyst, pharmacologist or pathologist 
together with a certificate in the prescribed forms signed by such inspector and a 

PAGE 37

copy of the aforesaid certificate shall be handed or transmitted by registered post to 
the owner or seller of such medicine or Scheduled substance or his agent. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 26 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 12 of Act 17/79] 
 
(3)    The analyst, pharmacologist or pathologist to whom a sample has been transmitted in 
terms of the provisions of subsection (2) shall with all convenient speed test, examine 
or analyse the sample delivered to him, and the result of the test, examination or 
analysis shall be stated in a certificate in the prescribed form. 
[Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 12 of Act 17/79] 
 
(4)    The owner of the medicine or Scheduled substance from which the sample was taken 
may claim from the Director-General an amount equal to the market value thereof. 
[Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 26 of Act 65/74] 
 
(5)   Where on a application to a magistrate in appears to such magistrate from 
information on oath that there are reasonable grounds to believe that- 
 
(a)   the conditions for entry described in subsection (1)(a) exist in relation to a 
private dwelling: 
 
(b)   entry to that private dwelling is necessary for any purpose relating to the 
administration or enforcement of this Act; and 
 
(c)   entry to the private dwelling has been refused or that entry thereto will be 
refused, 
 
a magistrate may issue a warrant authorizing the inspector named therein to enter that 
private dwelling subject to such conditions as may be specified in the warrant. 
[Sub-s. (5) added by s. 11 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(6)   If an inspector believes on reasonable grounds that- 
 
(a)   a warrant would be issued to him or her under subsection (5) if he or she 
applies for such a warrant; and 
 
(b)   a delay in obtaining such warrant would defeat the object of the entry, search 
and seizure, 
 
he or she may without a warrant enter and search any premises for any medicines, 
scheduled substance, book, record or document relevant to the administration or 
enforcement of this Act and seize or take samples as contemplated in subsection 
(1)(c). 
[Sub-s. (6) added by s. 11 of Act 59/2002] 
 
29.     Offences 
 
Any person who - 

PAGE 38

 
(a)   obstructs or hinders any inspector in the exercise of his or her powers or the 
performance of his or her duties under this Act; or 
[Para. (a) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(b)   contravenes or fails to comply with the provisions of section 14(1), 18, 18A or 18B; 
or 
[Para. (b) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(c)   contravenes the provisions of section 19(1) or fails to comply with a notice issued 
under section 19(2); or 
[Para. (c) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(d)   contravenes the provisions of section 20(1); or 
[Para. (d) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(e)   contravenes or fails to comply with any condition imposed under section 15(7); or 
[Para. (e) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(f)   fails to comply with any direction given under section 23 or contravenes the 
provisions of section 23(3); or 
[Para. (f) substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(g)  with fraudulent intent tampers with any sample taken in terms of this Act; or 
 
(h)  makes any false or misleading statement in connection with any medicine or 
Scheduled substance - 
 
(i)  in an application for the registration thereof; or 
 
(ii)  in the course of the sale thereof; or 
[Para. (h) substituted by s. 27 of Act 65/74] 
 
(i)  sells any medicine or Scheduled substance upon the container of which a false or 
misleading statement in connection with the contents is written; or 
[Para. (i) substituted by s. 27 of Act 65/74] 
 
(j)  for purposes of business or trade makes use of any report or certificate made or 
issued by an inspector, analyst, pharmacologist or pathologist under this Act; or 
 
(k)   contravenes any provision of section 22A, 22C(5) and (6), 22F, 22G or 22H or 
contravenes or fails to comply with any condition imposed thereunder; 
[Para. (k) added by s. 27 of Act 65/74 and substituted by s. 17 of Act 90/97] 
 
(l)  contravenes or fails to comply with the provisions of section 34; 
[Para. (l) added by s. 12 of Act 94/91] 
 

PAGE 39

(m)  manufactures, sells or uses a veterinary medicine in contravention of a prohibition 
referred to in section 36A, or contravenes, or fails to comply with, a condition 
imposed in terms of the said section, 
[Para. (m) added by s. 12 of Act 94/91] 
 
shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
30.     Penalties 
 
(1)   Any person who is convicted of an offence referred to in section 29 shall be liable to 
a fine, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 13 of Act 94/91 and s. 18 of Act 90/97] 
 
(2)    The court convicting any person of an offence under this Act may, upon the 
application of the prosecutor, declare any medicine or Scheduled substance in respect 
of which the offence has been committed to be forfeited to the State. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 28 of Act 65/74] 
 
(3)    Any medicine or Scheduled substance forfeited under this Act shall be destroyed or 
otherwise dealt with as the Director-General may direct. 
[Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 28 of Act 65/74] 
 
(4)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law contained, a magistrate‟s court 
shall be competent to impose any penalty provided for in this section. 
[Sub-s. (4) added by s. 18 of Act 90/97] 
 
31.     Procedure and evidence 
 
(1)    In any criminal proceedings under this Act - 
 
(a)  any quantity of a medicine or Scheduled substance in or upon any premises, 
place, vehicle, vessel or aircraft at the time a sample thereof is taken pursuant 
to the provisions of this Act shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to 
possess the same properties as such sample; 
[Para. (a) amended by s. 29 of Act 65/74] 
 
(b)  .......... 
[Para. (b) deleted by s. 19 of Act 90/97] 
 
(c)  a certificate stating the result of a test, examination or analysis carried out in 
terms of the provisions of section twenty-eight and purporting to be signed by 
the analyst, pharmacologist or pathologist who carried out such test, 
examination or analysis, shall be accepted as prima facie proof of the facts 
stated therein; 
 
(d)  any statement or entry contained in any book, record or document kept by any 
owner of a medicine or Scheduled substance, or by the manager, agent or 
employee of such owner or found upon or in any premises occupied by, or any 

PAGE 40

vehicle used in the business of, such owner, shall be admissible in evidence 
against him as an admission of the facts set forth in that statement or entry, 
unless it is proved that that statement or entry was not made by such owner, or 
by any manager, agent or employee of such owner in the course of his work as 
manager, or in the course of his agency or employment. 
[Para. (d) amended by s. 29 of Act 65/74] 
 
(2)    .......... 
[Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 13 of Act 17/79 and deleted by s. 19 of Act 90/97] 
 
(3)    The court in which any such certificate is adduced in evidence may in its discretion 
cause the person who signed such certificate to be summoned to give oral evidence in 
the proceedings in question or may cause written interrogatories to be submitted to 
him for reply, and such interrogatories and any reply thereto, purporting to be a reply 
from such person, shall be admissible in evidence in such proceedings. 
 
32.     .......... 
[S. 32 amended by s. 30 of Act 65/74 and repealed by s. 20 of Act 90/97]  
 
33.     Act or omission by manager, agent or employee 
 
(1)    Whenever any manager, agent or employee of any person (hereinafter called the 
employer) does or omits to do any act which it would be an offence under this Act 
for the employer to do or omit to do, then unless it is proved that - 
 
(a)  in doing or omitting to do that act the manager, agent or employee was acting 
without the connivance or the permission of the employer; and 
 
(b)  all reasonable steps were taken by the employer to prevent any act or omission 
of the kind in question; and 
 
(c)  it was not under any condition or in any circumstances within the scope of the 
authority or in the course of the employment of the manager, agent or 
employee to do or to omit to do acts, whether lawful or unlawful, of the 
character of the act or omission charged, 
 
the employer shall be presumed himself to have done or omitted to do that act and 
shall be liable to be convicted and sentenced in respect thereof; and the fact that he 
issued instructions forbidding any act or omission of the kind in question shall not, of 
itself, be accepted as sufficient proof that he took all reasonable steps to prevent the 
act or omission. 
 
(2)    Whenever any manager, agent or employee of any such employer does or omits to do 
an act which it would be an offence under this Act for the employer to do or omit to 
do, he shall be liable to be convicted and sentenced in respect thereof as if he were 
the employer. 
 

PAGE 41

(3)    Any such manager, agent or employee may be so convicted and sentenced in addition 
to the employer. 
 
33A.  Funds of council 
 
(1)   The funds of the council shall consist of-  
 
(a)   State funds received through the Department of Health;  
 
(b)   fees raised and interest on overdue fees;  
 
(c)   money accruing to the council from any other source. 
 
(2)   (a)   The council may accept money or other goods donated or bequeathed to 
the 
council, provided no condition is attached to such donation or bequest; 
 
(b)   Details of any such donation or bequest shall be specified in the relevant annual 
report of the council. 
 
(3)   The council shall utilise its funds for the defrayal of expenses incurred by the council 
in the performance of its functions under this Act. 
 
(4)   The council shall open an account with a bank as defined in section 1(1) of the Banks 
Act, 1990 (Act No. 94 of 1990), and shall deposit in that account all money referred 
to in subsections (1) and (2). 
 
(5)   The council shall keep full and proper records of all money received or expended, of 
its assets and liabilities and of its financial transactions. 
 
(6)   The records and annual financial statements referred to in subsection (5), shall be 
audited by the Auditor-General. 
 
(7)   The council may invest money which is deposited in terms of subsection (4) and 
which is not required for immediate use in any manner as it may deem fit. 
 
(8)   Any money which at the close of the council‟s financial year stands to the credit of 
the council in the account referred to in subsection (4) and money which has been 
invested in terms of subsection (7), shall be carried forward to the next financial year 
as a credit in the account of the council. 
[S. 33A inserted by s. 21 of Act 90/97] 
 
34.     Preservation of secrecy 
 
No person shall, except for the purpose of the exercise of his powers or the performance of 
his functions under this Act, or for the purpose of legal proceedings under this Act, or 
when required to do so by any competent court or under any law, or with the written 

PAGE 42

authority of the Director-General, disclose to any other person any information acquired by 
him in the exercise of his powers or the performance of his functions under this Act and 
relating to the business or affairs of any person, or use such information for self-gain or for 
the benefit of his employer. 
[S. 34 substituted by s. 14 of Act 94/91] 
 
34A.  Delegation of powers 
 
(1)   The Minister may in writing authorise the Director-General or any officer of the 
Department of Health to exercise any of the powers conferred upon the Minister by 
this Act other than the powers referred to in sections 3, 24(1) and 35, or to exercise 
or perform any of the duties or functions conferred or imposed on the Minister in 
terms of this Act. 
[Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 22 of Act 90/97] 
 
(2)    The Director-General may in writing authorize any officer of the Department of 
Health to exercise or perform in general or in a particular case or in cases of a 
particular nature, any power, duty or function, excluding any power, duty or function 
referred to in subsection (1), conferred or imposed on the Director-General by or in 
terms of this Act. 
[Sub-s. (2) amended by s. 22 of Act 90/97] 
[S. 34A inserted by s. 2 of Act 19/76 and substituted by s. 15 of Act 94/91] 
 
35.     Regulations 
 
(1)   The Minister may, in consultation with the council, make regulations- 
 
(i)      prescribing the categories of persons by whom application may be made for the 
registration of any medicine or to whom a certificate of registration may be 
transferred; 
 
(ii)     prescribing the forms which shall be used for any application for the 
registration of any medicine and the particulars which shall be furnished with 
any such application (including particulars regarding the method by which the 
medicine in question or any component of such medicine is manufactured and 
the premises at which such medicine or any such component is manufactured); 
 
(iii)    providing for the classification of medicines into classes or categories for the 
purposes of this Act; 
 
(iv)    prescribing the samples of any medicine and the quantity thereof which shall 
accompany any application for the registration of a medicine; 
 
(v)     prescribing the form in which the medicines register shall be kept and the 
particulars which shall be entered therein in respect of any registered medicine; 
 
(vi)    prescribing the form of any certificate of registration of any medicine; 

PAGE 43

 
(vii)   prescribing the circumstances in which, the conditions on which and the 
persons or categories of persons to whom any medicine or Scheduled substance 
may be sold; 
 
(viii)  prescribing the manner in which any package containing any medicine or 
Scheduled substance shall be labelled, packed or sealed; 
 
(ix)    prescribing the particulars in regard to the use thereof which shall be furnished 
with any medicine or Scheduled substance sold, and the manner in which such 
particulars shall be furnished; 
 
(x)     prescribing the particulars which shall appear in any advertisement relating to 
any medicine or Scheduled substance, or prohibiting the inclusion of any 
specified particulars in such advertisement, or the distribution of any such 
advertisement to a specified person or a specified category of persons or to a 
specified organisation or a specified category of organisations; 
 
(xi)    prescribing the requirements with which any medicine or any component 
thereof shall comply in regard to composition, therapeutic suitability and 
effect, purity or any other property; 
 
(xii)   prescribing the particulars which shall be published in the Gazette in respect of 
any application for registration referred to in section 15(11); 
 
(xiii)  prescribing the procedure at meetings of the council and of any committee 
appointed under section 9 (including the quorum in the case of committees) 
and the manner in which meetings of any such committee shall be called; 
 
(xiv)   prescribing the particulars which shall appear on a prescription or an order for 
a medicine or a Scheduled substance, the number of issues of a medicine or a 
Scheduled substance that may be made on any such specified prescription or 
order, the manner in which any such prescription or order shall be issued and 
the period for which any such prescription or order shall be retained; 
 
(xv)    prescribing the forms of licences, registers, prescription books, records and 
other documents which shall be kept or used in respect of Scheduled 
substances, the manner in which they shall be kept, the particulars which shall 
be entered therein and the place where and the period for which they shall be 
retained; 
 
(xvi)   requiring the furnishing of returns, reports and information in respect of 
Scheduled substances and plants from which any such substance can be 
extracted, derived, produced or manufactured, and in respect of any medicine 
or other substance of which any such Scheduled substance is a component; 
 

PAGE 44

(xvii)  as to the transshipment or the exportation from or importation into the 
Republic of any Scheduled substance, specifying the ports or places at which 
such substance may be brought into the Republic; 
 
(xviii) authorising and regulating or restricting the transmission through the Republic 
of Scheduled substances; 
 
(xix)   prescribing the manner in which packages containing Scheduled substances 
shall be labelled when imported into or manufactured in the Republic and the 
persons by whom and the manner in which they shall be kept; 
 
(xx)    authorising and regulating the purchase, acquisition, keeping or use of 
preparations of cocaine by managers or persons in charge of factories or 
workshops in connection with the treatment of eye injuries or for other 
essential purposes; 
 
(xxi)   authorising and regulating the purchase, acquisition, keeping or use of 
Scheduled substances by particular persons or categories of persons; 
 
(xxii)  authorising and regulating the possession by persons entering or departing 
from the Republic of specified quantities of Scheduled substances for personal 
medicinal use; 
 
(xxiii) as to the disposal or destruction of a medicine or a Scheduled substance, and 
the records which shall be kept in respect thereof; 
 
(xxiv)  as to the importation, exportation, conveyance, keeping, storage, processing 
and packing of medicines and Scheduled substances, and the manner in which 
medicines and Scheduled substances shall be kept and controlled in different 
categories of hospitals; 
[Para. (xxiv) substituted by s. 12 of Act 59/2002] 
 
(xxv)   prescribing the methods in accordance with which samples may be taken 
under this Act and the form of the certificates to be issued by inspectors in 
respect of such samples; 
 
(xxvi)  prescribing the methods to be employed and the form of the certificates to be 
issued in connection with the testing, examination or analysis of samples taken 
under this Act; 
 
(xxvii) authorising, regulating, controlling, restricting or prohibiting the registration, 
manufacture, modification, importation, exportation, storage, transportation, 
sale or use of any medical device or class of medical devices or medicines in 
respect of its safety, quality and efficacy; 
[Para. (xxvii) substituted by s. 12 of Act 59/2002] 
 

PAGE 45

(xxviii)with regard to any matter to ensure the safety, quality and efficacy of 
medicines and medical devices; 
 
(xxix)  as to the summary seizure and disposal of any Scheduled substance found in 
the possession or custody of any person not entitled under this Act to keep or 
use it; 
 
(xxx)   as to the disposal or destruction of a Scheduled substance which has become 
unfit for use, and the report to be furnished in respect thereof; 
 
(xxx)   prescribing the fee to be paid to the registrar in respect of an application for 
the registration, and in respect of the registration of a medicine, Scheduled 
substance or medical device, the fee to be paid annually to the registrar in 
respect of the retention of the registration of a medicine, Scheduled substance 
or medical device and the date on which such annual fee shall be paid; 
 
(xxxii) prescribing the fee payable in respect of the authorisation of the use of 
unregistered medicines, the issuing of permits and certificates under this Act, 
the issuing or renewal of any licence under this Act, the performance of 
inspections to assess the quality of medicines, Scheduled substances or medical 
devices for the purpose of registration and the evaluation of changes to the 
particulars contained in registers; 
 
(xxxiii)relating to appeals against decisions of the Director-General or the council; 
 
(xxxiv) relating to the conditions under which medicines or Scheduled substances 
may be sold; 
 
(xxxv)  relating to the repackaging of medicines in patient-ready packs; 
 
(xxxvi) relating to the safety, quality and efficacy of any interchangeable multi-
source medicine; 
 
(xxxvii)relating to the scientific, pharmaceutical, clinical and other skills required by 
a member of the council or by a member of the executive committee of the 
council to evaluate the quality, efficacy and safety of medicines; 
 
(xxxviii)relating to the safety, quality and efficacy of imported medicines; 
 
(xxxix) relating to the control and conduct of clinical trials; 
 
(xi)    with regard to any matter which in terms of this Act shall or may be 
prescribed; and 
 

PAGE 46

(xii)   generally for the efficient carrying out of the objects and purposes of this Act, 
and the generality of this provision shall not be limited by the preceding 
paragraphs of this subsection. 
 
(2)   The Minister shall, not less than three months before any regulation is made under 
subsection (1), cause the text of such regulation to be published in the Gazette, 
together with a notice declaring his or her intention to make that regulation and 
inviting interested persons to furnish him or her with any comments thereon or any 
representations they may wish to make in regard thereto. 
 
(3)   The provisions of subsection (2) shall not apply in respect of- 
 
(a)   any regulation which, after the provisions of that subsection have been 
complied with, has been amended by the Minister in consequence of comments 
or representations received by him or her in pursuance of the notice issued 
thereunder; or 
 
(b)   any regulation in respect of which the Minister is, after consultation with the 
council, of the opinion that the public interest requires it to be made without 
delay. 
 
(4)   A regulation under subsection (1)(xxxi) and (xxxii) shall be made only in 
consultation with the Minister of Finance. 
 
(5)   Regulations made under subsection (1)(xi) may prescribe that any medicine or any 
component thereof shall comply with the requirements set out in any publication 
which in the opinion of the council is generally recognised as authoritative. 
 
(6)   Regulations may be made under this section in respect of particular medicines or 
Scheduled substances or classes or categories of medicines or Scheduled substances 
or in respect of medicines or Scheduled substances other than particular classes or 
categories of medicines or Scheduled substances, and different regulations may be so 
made in respect of different medicines or Scheduled substances or different classes or 
categories of medicines or Scheduled substances. 
 
(7)   (a)   Regulations made under this section may prescribe penalties for any 
contravention 
thereof or failure to comply therewith of a fine, or imprisonment for a period 
not exceeding 10 years. 
 
(b)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law contained a magistrate‟s 
court shall be competent to impose any penalty provided for in paragraph (a). 
 
(8)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), the Minister may, if he or she 
deems it to be in the public interest, after consultation with the executive committee 

PAGE 47

appointed under section 9, make regulations relating to any matter referred to in 
subsection (1) or amend or repeal any regulation made in terms of that subsection. 
[S. 35 amended by s. 5 of Act 29/68, s. 1 of Act 88/70 and s. 7 of Act 95/71, substituted by s. 31 of Act 65/74, 
amended by s. 3 of Act 19/76, s. 14 of Act 17/79, s. 7 of Act 20/81, s. 7 of Act 71/91 and s. 16 of Act 94/91 and 
substituted by s. 23 of Act 90/97]  
 
36.     Exclusion of any drug from operation of Act 
 
The Minister may, on the unanimous recommendation of the members present at any 
meeting of the council, by notice in the Gazette exclude, subject to such conditions as he 
may determine, any medicine from the operation of any or all the provisions of this Act, 
and may in like manner amend or withdraw any such notice. 
[S. 36 amended by s. 32 of Act 65/74] 
 
36A.   Minister may prohibit the manufacture, sale or use of certain veterinary medicines 
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or in any other law contained, the 
Minister may by notice in the Gazette for any reason other than the safety, quality or 
therapeutic efficacy of a veterinary medicine - 
 
(a)  prohibit the manufacture, sale or use of any veterinary medicine containing a 
substance mentioned in the notice; or 
 
(b)  prohibit such manufacture, sale or use, except in accordance with such 
conditions as may be specified in the notice, 
 
and may in like manner repeal or amend such notice. 
[S. 36A inserted by s. 17 of Act 94/91] 
 
37.     .......... 
[S. 37 substituted by s. 33 of Act 65/74 and s. 18 of Act 94/91 and repealed by s. 24 of Act 90/97] 
 
37A.   Amendment of Schedules 
 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 35(2), the Minister may, on the recommendation 
of the council, from time to time by notice in the Gazette amend any Schedule prescribed 
under section 22A(2) by the inclusion therein or the deletion therefrom of any medicine or 
other substance, or in any other manner. 
[S. 37A inserted by s. 34 of Act 65/74, repealed and reinserted by s. 19 of Act 94/91 and substituted by s. 25 of Act 
90/97] 
 
38.     Operation of Act in relation to other laws 
 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any other law 
which is not in conflict with or inconsistent with this Act. 
 
39.     State bound 
 

PAGE 48

This Act binds the State. 
[S. 39 repealed by s. 20 of Act 94/91 and inserted by s. 26 of Act 90/97 with effect from 1 July 2005] 
 
40.     Short title 
 
This Act shall be called the Medicines and Related Substances Act, 1965. 
[S. 40 substituted by s. 35 of Act 65/74 and s. 40 of Act 90/97] 
 
Editor’s note: 
The Schedules have not been published here since they were re-inserted due to the extensive nature of its 
contents. 
However, the Schedules and amendments to the Schedules are available in PDF.  
Please note this is not the consolidated version of the Schedules. 
 
Schedules to the Act – GN R509 / GG 24727 / 20030410 
Amendments to Schedules to the Act – GN R491 / GG 31010 / 20080425 
Amendments to Schedules to the Act – GN 935 / GG 31387 / 20080905 
Amendments to Schedules to the Act – GN R1230 / GG 32838 / 20091231 
Amendments to Schedules to the Act – GN R227 / GG 35149 / 20120315 
Amendments to Schedule to the Act – GN R674 / GG 36827 / 20130913  
Amendments to Schedule to the Act – GN R690 / GG 36850 / 20130920  
Amendments to Schedule to the Act – GN R104 / GG 37318 / 20140211 
Amendments to Schedule to the Act – GN R352 / GG 37622 / 20140508 
 
 
Schedule 1 
[Schedule 1 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R278/77, GN R437/77, GN R1194/77, GN R1674/78, GNR2410/78, GN R1926/79, GN 
R2416/82, GN R1289/85 and GN 155/86, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN R2841/90, GN R2169/91, GN 
R348/93 and GN R775/93, repealed, and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1556/94, GN R673/95, 
GN R42/96, GN R1496/96, GN R1098/97 and GN R1099/97 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 2 
[Schedule 2 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R278/77, GN R437/77, GN R1988/77, GN R1674/78, GN R2410/78, GN R1926/79, 
GN R2507/79, GN R2416/82, GN R1289/85, GN 155/86 and GN 154/86, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by 
GN R1132/89, GN R1862/90, GN R2841/90, GN R2169/91, GN R141/93 and GN R775/93, repealed and reinserted 
by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1556/94, GN R1557/94, GN R673/95 and GN R1496/96 and repealed by s. 
27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 3 
[Schedule 3 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R278/77, GN R437/77, GN R1674/78, GN R2410/78, GN R1926/79, GN R2507/79, 
GN R658/81, GN R1289/85 and GN 154/86, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN R2841/90, GN R2169/91 
and GN R775/93, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1556/94, GN R673/95, GN 
R42/96 and GN R1496/96 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 4 
[Schedule 4 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R279/77, GN R437/77, GN R1194/77, GN R1674/78, GN R2410/78, GN R1926/79, 
GN R658/81, GN R2416/82, GN R1289/85 and GN 154/86, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN R2841/90, 

PAGE 49

GN R2169/91, GN R580/92, GN R141/93 and GN R775/93, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended 
by GN R1556/94, GN R673/95, GN R42/96 and GN R1496/96 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 5 
[Schedule 5 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R143/77, GN R279/77, GN R437/77, GN R1674/78, GN R2410/78,  GN R1926/79, GN 
271/80, GN R2416/82, GN R1289/85 and GN 154/86, substituted by GN 225/89, amended  by GN R2841/90, GN 
R580/ and GN R775/93, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1556/94, GN R673/95 and 
GN R42/96 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 6 
[Schedule 6 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R437/77, GN R1674/78, GN R1926/79, GN R658/81, GN R2416/82 and GN R1289/85, 
substituted by GN 225/89, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1557/94 and repealed by 
s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 7 
[Schedule 7 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R437/77, GN R1567/77, GN R1674/78 , GN R2410/78, GN R1926/79, GN R658/81, 
GN R2416/82 and GN R1289/85, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN R2841/90 and GN R775/93, repealed 
and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1496/96 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
Schedule 8 
[Schedule 8 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R437/77, GN R1567/77, GN R1674/78, GN R2410/78, GN R1926/79, GN R658/81, 
GN R2416/82 and GN R1289/85, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN R1133/89, GN R2841/90 and GN 
R775/93, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91, amended by GN R1556/94 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 
90/97] 
 
Schedule 9 
[Schedule 9 added by s. 36 of Act 65/74, substituted by GN R420/75, GN R2244/75, GN R575/76 and GN 
R2082/76, amended by GN R437/77, GN R2416/82 and GN R1289/85, substituted by GN 225/89, amended by GN 
R775/93, repealed and reinserted by s. 21 of Act 94/91 and repealed by s. 27 of Act 90/97] 
 
 

PAGE 50